
--- PAGE 116 ---
PAGE 112 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
Policy-Trans/3.7:
Tackle Traffic Congestion 
Introducing Advanced 
Technologies
Planned enhancements to traffic 
light technology and developments to 
systems that support us will be vital 
in helping us manage traffic in real 
time. 
Strategic Action:
— Ensure safer movement in critical 
and busiest junctions (Map-5.7).
— Introduction of advanced 
technology;
Implementation Tools
— Adequate manpower with 
technical knowledge and skill in 
transportation shall be recruited in 
Traffic Unit of Bangladesh Police to 
manage the traffic system properly;
— Installing cutting-edge traffic light 
technology at different sites across 
the Dhaka City Region, Split Cycle 
Offset Optimization Technique 
(SCOOT) technology that 
automatically detects real-time 
traffic conditions and optimizes 
traffic light timings to reduce 
delays;
— Enhancing sophisticated traffic 
models, which will support 
successful scheme design and 
help plan improvements to relieve 
congestion hotspots;
— Introduction of Intelligent 
Transport Systems (ITS) 
programme to access to real-time 
data, giving the Streets Traffic 
Control Centre cutting-edge 
technology, (See Box-5.3);
— Revitalize Traffic Control Centre 
for actively managing congestion 
in Dhaka city in real-time, by 
identifying traffic hotspots and 
changing traffic light phasing to 
improve traffic flow on the roads;
— Creation of grade separation 
(Elevated/vehicular underpass) at 
major roadway intersections for 
efficient movement of traffic;
— Peak hour Congestion Pricing/
Electronic Road Pricing (ERP)
technology can be introduced 
which is proved to be successful to 
reduce traffic congestion in cities 
like London, Singapore, Stockholm 
and Oslo.
— Provide overpass/underpass at 
major roadway intersections for 
efficient movement of pedestrians;
— Limiting hawkers to specific 
locations, rehabilitation and free 
the footpaths as much as possible.
— No bus stoppage and rickshaw 
parking will be allowed within the 
50m of roadway intersection;
— No hat or bazar will be allowed on 
major roads; 
Implementing Agency: 
— DTCA, Local Government 
Agencies, Metropolitan Police 
(Traffic), RAJUK
Treatment on 
Interchange 
Point 
The interchange points of Primary 
Road, Mass Transit Routes, Ring 
Road, Rail and any other future rail 
network should be developed as 
interchange stations/convergence 
zone. The change over facilities 
should include approach roads, 
pedestrian walkways, shuttle 
services, wherever feasible parking, 
areas for various modes including 
feeder buses, and adequate 
public conveniences, etc.
BOX
5.4
Introduction of 
Interchange Point Introduction of 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) 
in Dhaka Region 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) technology is established 
worldwide which the general term is used for new road transport systems 
driven by advanced information and communications technology. Congested 
roadways and general concern for the environment are the principle reasons 
why these technologies are promoted. ITS, is expected to help resolve these 
problems by eliminating the amount of time people are wasting in traffic 
jams and producing exhaust gases. 
Japan already has developed ITS, which has following benefits:
• Advances in Navigation Systems
• Electronic Toll Collection
• Assistance for Safe Driving
• Optimization of Traffic Management
• Increasing Efficiency in Road Management
• Support for Public Transport
• Increasing Efficiency in Commercial
• Support for Pedestrians
• Support for Emergency Operations
BOX
5.5
--- PAGE 117 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 113
CRITICAL ROAD INTERSECTIONS AND 
MAJOR TRAFFIC CONGENTED POINTS IN RAJUK AREA
MAP
5.7
--- PAGE 118 ---

--- PAGE 119 ---
CHAPTER 06
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
 FOR ALL
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | CHAPTER 06
--- PAGE 120 ---

--- PAGE 121 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 117
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 21-1
6.2 SWOT Analysis
This section of the chapter gives 
a short SWOT analysis of existing 
housing and the new policies 
proposed in the Structure Plan.
AFFORDABLE
HOUSING 
FOR ALL
6.1 Introduction
In a rapidly growing city like Dhaka, housing comes up as a major problem. The genesis of the problem remains in the 
fact that the development of housing and related infrastructure can’t cope with the growth of population. Government’s 
lone effort in terms of resources, capabilities and initiatives is not adequate to resolve the ever increasing housing 
problem. As a result the gap between housing demand and supply becomes wider. Housing is a key factor in making 
Dhaka Metropolis a sustainable, affordable, livable and equitable city. With RAJUK area’s population projected to grow 
from 15 million to 26 million people by 2035, providing suitable housing in the right locations is a strategic direction of 
this Dhaka Structure Plan.
STRENGTH
Very high demand for housing.
Vibrant real estate market with existence of a large number of developers.
Adequate supply of locally produced building materials.
Existence of a National Housing Policy that sets a direction for the sector.
WEAKNESS
Scarcity of buildable land for affordable housing projects.
Absence of initiatives for directing real-estate development towards existing urban 
agglomerations outside core city of Dhaka.
Weak control over private developers engaged in land development and building 
construction rules.
Hassle and delay in approval of building plans by relevant authority.
Lack of capacity of public agencies such as RAJUK, NHA, HBRI, etc.
Failure to take up need based actions according to National Housing Policy to 
address housing crisis of low and middle income population.
Poor communication network to connect CBD.
OPPORTUNITY
Increasing purchasing power of the people due to expansion of economy and 
inflow of remittance.
Provision of incentives to private sector developers for keeping a reasonable 
share of units in their projects as affordable housing units by means of cross￾subsidization.
Promoting public-private partnership in provision of affordable housing for a 
greater population.
Promotion of low-cost building technology by House Building Research Institute.
Strengthening of House Building Finance Corporation for provision of Soft loans to 
low and middle income population.
THREAT
Political instability
Very high rate of rural to urban migration resulting in mushroom growth of informal 
settlements.
Ever increasing demand for housing is pushing prices and rents of land and 
dwelling units beyond the reach of the majority of population.
Absence of a ceiling on land and real estate ownership and legalization of investing 
black money in purchasing real estate properties has skewed the market towards 
the better-off segment of the society.
High interest rate on bank credit.
Lack of adequate infrastructure and services to facilitate housing.
--- PAGE 122 ---
PAGE 118 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
6.3 Scenario Analysis
6.3.1 Existing Scenario Analysis
Dhaka is now growing at an 
unprecedented rate accommodating 
more than 600,000 people per year 
(CIA-The World Fact Book). About 
65% of the Dhaka’s population is 
due to migration. At this rate of 
migration, it is assumed that every 
year more than 120,000 dwelling 
units will be required to house the 
growing population.
According to RDP Survey 2013, 
out of the total existing houses, 
18.38% is pucca, 33.58% semi pucca, 
and 48.05% is katcha types which 
accommodate the lower level of the 
city dwellers.
The new structures that have been 
built since 2006, almost 95% is one 
storied, while structures with two 
storey’s and above have grown for 
the entire DMR with approximately 
equal rate of around 3%. Considering 
the scarcity of available flood-free 
lands within the metro Dhaka, there 
is no option, but to maximize use of 
the land resources by going vertical. 
Almost 90% structures in DMR is 
being used for residential purpose. 
While residential use is dominant by 
wide margin among all the uses in all 
regions, however, not all the regions 
have the same share of residential 
use. Among all the regions, the 
Central and Southern regions have 
the highest share of non-residential 
uses
a. Housing Provision
The rapid growth of Dhaka’s 
population has also led to greater 
demand for housing units including 
land for housing. But the pattern of 
land ownership in Dhaka is highly 
skewed. More than 56% households 
have no land in the city. It does 
not, however, include the slum and 
squatter dwellers (bastuharas). Had 
they been included, the figure would 
have been over 70%.
Upper Income Group
City 
Population (%)
City’s 
Residential Land (%)
Middle Income Group
Squatters
Refugee rehabilitation colonies/ camps
Bustees
Tenement slums
Employees housing
Others
Figure-6.1: Land Occupancy by Different 
Group of People in Dhaka (Source: Islam, 
1998)
Dhaka housing market currently 
serves primarily the upper and upper 
middle income households. So most 
of the people in the city do not own 
any land. Renting in unplanned 
urban periphery or squatting 
illegally is the only option available 
to them2
. The fact is that with a 
faster urbanization with limited 
expansion of urban space in a given 
geographical entity, more and more 
households tend to live in rented 
accommodations as possibilities of 
self owned accommodations shrink. 
Figure-6.1 shows the share of land 
occupied by different group of people 
in the mega city.
b. Public Sector Contribution in 
Housing Supply
Both, formal and informal delivery 
system of housing exists in Dhaka 
where the share of formal system is 
comparatively smaller. Government 
can meet only 7% of the total housing 
demand, whereas private sector 
entertains the bulk of 93% and a 
significant percentage (55%) of the 
private sector housing is supplied 
by the informal sector (individual 
developer). Estimated even on a 
very conservative scale, roughly 
25,000 housing units is supplied 
annually in Dhaka City by the private 
sector against a negligible amount 
contributed by the government. 
RAJUK is the leading public sector 
land development agency in Dhaka 
city supplying about 75% of the city’s 
serviced housing. It has developed 
some 13 townships /housing estate/
site & services projects. 
Figure-6.2: Contribution of Real Estate Developers in Housing Sector from 1982-2013 
(Source: Seraj, 2014)
--- PAGE 123 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 119
PWD builds flats for all categories 
of government employees. It shares 
approximately 9% of housing on 
subsidized rental basis within the 
employee’s service period. Defense 
Officer Housing Society has their 
own housing projects to facilitate 
accommodation for their officers 
in four locations within Dhaka 
City, at Banani, Mohakhali Mirpur 
and Baridhara. And recently a new 
housing area is being developed at 
Savar Cantonment area.
Infrastructure and service providing 
agencies, like, RAJUK, DCC, R&H, 
PDB, PWD, DWASA, and DPHE 
indirectly promote housing through 
provision of infrastructure and utility 
services. Development of roads, 
provision of power supply or drainage 
facilities and housing credit create 
a favorable condition for housing 
development. Some NGOs are 
working to provide better livelihood 
to the city poor.
c. Role of Private Sector in Housing 
Development
The private real estate companies 
emerged as housing providers in 
Bangladesh especially in Dhaka 
back in early 80s with residential 
apartment development. The growth 
was sluggish until the last decade 
but from the middle of 1990s the 
apartment development got a boost. 
At the beginning there were less than 
10 developers, the number increased 
to 42 in 1988. In 2000, there were 
about 200 companies in this sector. 
Now in 2014, the total number of real 
estate companies is more than 1500 
(REHAB, 2014). 
Now it is one of the major industries 
in the country contributing 12-
15% of National GDP with about 5 
million skilled and unskilled human 
resources are directly involved in 
this sector. Out of annually supplied 
total housing units, private real 
estate companies contribute more 
than 17000 units. The private land 
development companies are also 
engaged in developing various land 
based housing projects, through 
which they supply serviced plots. 
They are actually now playing the 
lead role in the supply of serviced 
housing land.
d. Housing for Low Income People 
Housing is the most immediate need 
for the migrants in the city. As most 
migrants belong to the disadvantaged 
group of the society they live in low 
cost dilapidated and shanty houses. 
As a result large slums and squatters 
have developed in the city. About 
3.5 million low income people are 
living in 4000 slums and squatters 
in Dhaka city. There are also about 
52,000 (BBS 2011) floating people 
in the mega city without having any 
shelter. They live under the open 
sky, on the footpaths, in the railway 
stations, launch ghats, bus terminals, 
building stair cages or any other 
uncommon places. They are the most 
deprived section of the Dhaka’s urban 
community.
City’s low income groups receive 
a minimal share of RAJUK’s land 
allocation. In Purbachal project 
only 4.3%(110.46 acres) of land 
has been reserved for the low 
income groups, in Uttara 3rd Phase 
the share was only 7.5% (40.51 
acres) and in Jhilmeel Project the 
allocation for the low income was 
only 1.2%.However, the price and the 
mechanism determined for allotment 
of land is hardly accessible by the 
lower income people. NHA has so 
far succeeded in providing 15,704 
housing units to the lower income 
groups, but its recent projects are not 
affordable to the urban poor.
e. Housing Crisis in the Main City and 
the Need for Decentralization
There is acute shortage of housing 
in the core Dhaka, particularly for 
the middle and the low income 
groups. Failing to afford standard 
housing, some families are forced 
to live in low graded houses. Other 
families, intending to live in a quality 
accommodation spend substantial 
part of their monthly income for 
housing sacrificing other needs. 
Low income families work, both, in 
the formal and mostly in informal 
sectors. Many leave their families 
back in the village homes as they 
cannot afford to have housing in the 
city. 
If economic activities can be 
decentralized and a part of the 
employment centres can be shifted to 
smaller urban sub-centres in the city 
periphery demand for housing will 
also be shifted to those places. 
This will reduce demand for housing 
in the main city. As many houses will 
be released in the main city rent will 
come down. This calls for developing 
infrastructure and services in the 
peripheral urban centres to attract 
investment in housing those areas. 
Government can build subsidized 
shelters for low income and floating 
people in the city periphery as there 
will be sources of employment after 
economic decentralization. These 
shelters can be built at lower cost as 
the price in the periphery is much 
lower compared to the main city. 
--- PAGE 124 ---
PAGE 120 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
6.2 Future Scenario and Potential 
6.2.1 Housing Need Estimation
a. Housing Need Estimation
Housing need reflects the actual 
requirement of housing for a 
particular size of population, while 
housing demand usually reflects 
the amount of housing for which 
the population is able and willing 
to pay. To bridge the gap between 
the housing needs and the effective 
housing demands, financing should 
play a crucial role. In fact, the 
increase in housing supply becomes 
meaningless unless they are met 
with effective demands that can 
purchase them. Vigorous and diverse 
public financing schemes need to be 
devised and made available for the 
improvement in housing situations.
The population for Dhaka City in the 
year 2035 is estimated to be about 
26 Millions. Dhaka City core area is 
already overcrowded with an average 
density of more than 700pph. In 
Dhaka presently number of dwelling 
units added per year is far less than 
the required number. According to 
BBS, the backlog of dwelling units in 
2015 is 0.76 million (see Table-6.1).
The housing need assessment 
process consists of three main 
components. These are, growth of 
new households, shortage of existing 
dwelling units and replacement of 
old and dilapidated dwelling units. 
Creation of new families out of 
existing population and arrival of new 
households through migration make 
up the new households. The shortage 
of units is simply the existing backlog 
of unmet housing needs.
Replacement of housing units is 
required because every year some 
part of the existing housing stock 
(especially the semi pucca and 
katchas) wears out and calls for 
replacement or upgrading. Therefore, 
replacement of 20% of the existing 
housing stock is added to estimate 
the future housing unit requirement.
Aggregated Household Method is the 
simplest and widely used approach 
to forecast the housing need. This 
method estimates the forecasted 
household number. The forecasted 
population (P) is divided by the 
forecasted average household size(S) 
to produce the forecasted number of 
housing requirement (H). So, H= P/S.
Using this formula the future 
housing need has been calculated 
with 5 year interval upto the year 
2035 (Table-6.1). At the end of the 
plan period demand is expected to 
be about 1.26 million. Timely and 
effective measures are required to 
be taken by both public and private 
sectors to accelerate the supply of 
housing stock at affordable price for 
all income groups of the projected 
population.
Table-6.1: Housing Need Estimation for DMR upto 2035 (in millions)
Region Population/
Demand
Year
2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035
Central 
Region
Population 8.61 9.76 10.83 11.76 12.46 13.05
Household 1.88 2.11 2.36 2.63 2.87 3.07
Demand 0.41 0.46 0.51 0.45 0.63 0.67
Northern 
Region
Population 1.58 2.09 2.60 3.11 3.55 3.91
Household 0.39 0.5 0.66 0.84 1.05 1.28
Demand 0.07 0.09 0.11 0.14 0.18 0.22
Eastern 
Region
Population 0.60 0.66 0.73 0.83 0.95 1.08
Household 0.14 0.15 0.17 0.19 0.21 0.23
Demand 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.04
Southern 
Region
Population 1.91 2.22 2.50 2.76 2.97 3.15
Household 0.45 0.52 0.6 0.68 0.76 0.82
Demand 0.07 0.09 0.1 0.11 0.13 0.15
South￾Western 
region
Population 0.77 0.87 0.95 1.06 1.18 1.31
Household 0.17 0.19 0.22 0.25 0.28 0.31
Demand 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.05
Western 
Region
Population 1.25 1.73 2.21 2.69 3.11 3.44
Household 0.33 0.42 0.54 0.65 0.74 0.81
Demand 0.07 0.07 0.09 0.11 0.12 0.13
Total
Population 14.73 17.32 19.82 22.21 24.22 25.94
Household 3.36 3.89 4.55 5.24 5.91 6.52
Demand 0.68 0.76 0.88 0.88 1.14 1.26
Source: Population Census 2011 & Compiled by Consultant, RDP 
(*Household size in 2011 was 4.51 where as it is expected to be lowered to 4.01 in 2035 through 
government effective population planning and motivational measures.)
--- PAGE 125 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 121
HOUSING DEMAND IN DIFFERENT PLANNING REGIONS 
IN 2035
MAP
6.1
--- PAGE 126 ---
PAGE 122 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
6.4 Critical Issues
Following are the critical issues observed in the Dhaka’s housing sector. 
a. Deprivation of the Low Income 
People in Respect of Housing Provision
Both, public and private sectors 
are playing apathetic role in 
addressing the housing needs of the 
low income city dwellers. Despite 
recommendations in several plans 
and reports, no plausible measures 
were evolved by the public sector 
housing agencies to provide adequate 
housing to the urban poor, so housing 
need of a large section of the urban 
dwellers remains unfulfilled.
b. Inappropriate Initiative to Meet 
Housing Need
Public sector housing agencies, like, 
RAJUK stresses more on supply of 
serviced plots that takes a long time 
to convert into real house. Many 
allottees do not go for immediate 
housing construction for many 
reasons. As a result no housing units 
are added to the housing supply from 
the land based housing projects for 
long. Instead, provision of supply of 
ready apartment is a better response 
to address the housing need. 
c. Lack of Diverse Housing Financing 
Schemes for Needy Households 
Housing, perhaps the single most 
expensive asset a family can own 
in its lifetime, seldom falls within 
the reach of average households. 
Unfortunately, housing financing is 
relatively undeveloped and rather 
limited at the moment for all income 
groups.
d. High Land Price Limiting Access to 
Housing
Since majority of the city dwellers 
belong to middle and low income 
groups, they cannot afford house in 
the city amid constantly rising land 
price. 
e. Absence of Infrastructure in Potential 
Housing Areas in the City Fringe
Because of high land price in the 
main city a large section of the 
people target city fringe areas for 
their housing. But they are unable 
to build houses because of absence 
of infrastructure in most of the city 
fringe areas.
f. Lengthy and Cumbersome Process of 
Planning Permission
According to Building Construction 
Act, 1952 before development of any 
housing unit the building has to be 
got approved from RAJUK. But the 
current process of approval is lengthy 
and cumbersome. This often delays 
production and supply of housing 
leading to crisis in housing supply. 
g. Lack of Affordable Housing
Affordable housing refers to 
dwellings which households with 
low-to-moderate incomes can afford, 
while meeting other essential living 
costs. Under the current market price 
of housing over 78% of the lower 
middle income group and 70.73% of 
the middle income group families 
cannot afford housing in the city 
(Table-6.2). 
Table-6.2: Affordability Level of Different Income Groups of People 
Affordability 
level
Lower Middle￾Income Group %
Middle Middle￾Income Group %
Upper Middle-Income 
Group %
Affordable 4.88 21.95 47.97
Unaffordable 78.05 70.73 52.03
Severely 
unaffordable 17.07 7.32 0
Source: Jahan and Kalam (2012)
--- PAGE 127 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 123
6.5 Future Plan and Direction 
As future directions for housing promotion the following goal, 
objectives & policies have been set
6.5.1 Goal
INCREASE THE RANGE OF AFFORDABLE 
AND APPROPRIATE HOUSING 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOW TO MODERATE 
INCOME GROUP
Apart from providing shelter, for most people affordable 
housing is the foundation for life’s opportunities and a 
doorway to success. But many households are finding 
this goal difficult to secure, with the problem most acute 
amongst those on low-to-moderate incomes. This comes 
on top of a long-term decline in affordability, an emerging 
gap between supply and demand at the low cost end of the 
market, and an overstretched public housing system. 
6.5.2 Objective and Policy
Considering the present scenario of Dhaka’s housing 
sector, future need and the critical issues, the Structure 
Plan has set the following objectives and policies to attain 
the goal of housing development 
--- PAGE 128 ---
PAGE 124 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
OBJECTIVE-HN 01:
TO INCREASE HOUSING SUPPLY 
Presently, there remains huge gap between housing stock and population growth. There is an annual housing shortage of 
0.24 million units (BBS Census 2011); Vigorous endeavor is needed to meet the housing need for the projected population 
of 2035. Housing supply must commensurate with the housing need caused by increasing population that must also be 
livable to ensure health and security of the dwellers.
Policy-HN/1.1:
Promote Infrastructure and Services in the 
Potential and Designated Housing Areas 
This approach is necessary to enable developers to 
develop housing in their lands in potential and designated 
housing areas. This in turn will increase housing supply.
Strategic Action:
— Establishment of fast and effective connectivity.
— Extension and assurance of basic urban services.
Implementation Tools: 
— Take up programmes and projects for establishment of 
effective regional connectivity through fast mass transit. 
— Take up programmes and projects to provide utility 
services to potential residential areas in advance.
— Provide good access to public transport and a wide 
variety of services and amenities in advance from 
potential housing areas.
Implementing Agency:
— RAJUK, NHA, LGED, DTCA.
Policy-HN/ 1.2:
Ensure Adequate Supply of Land for New 
Residential Development
Strategic Action: 
— Adoption of participatory housing land development 
approach and advance acquisition of private land in 
suitable locations for housing development. 
Implementation Tools:
— Undertaking Land Readjustment and Guided Land 
Development, Community Mortgage Programme 
(CMP) method based housing projects in fringe areas by 
public sector housing agencies.
— Creation of stock of housing land by making compulsory 
acquisition of land in potential and designated housing 
areas avoiding valuable agricultural land. 
— Dilapidated Government owned quarters have to be 
demolished and rebuild high rise apartment to provide 
more housing to government employees;
— Provide housing close to the job locations for major 
industrial clusters;
— Development of Housing estate is strictly restricted in 
disaster prone and conservation areas.
Implementing Agency: 
— RAJUK, NHA, and LGED.
Policy-HN/1.3:
Devise Effective and Workable Housing 
Financing Mechanism 
To transform the housing needs into actual demand, and 
to enhance the opportunities of decent housing for the 
modest income families, diverse forms of housing finance 
should be devised and made available for both, public 
and private sectors. Particularly, government finance 
institutions should consider preference rates for the 
needy families on long-term bases. This is also in line with 
the suggested policy above (Policy-HN/2.4).
Strategic Action:
— Government need to create diverse forms of housing 
finance schemes utilizing experiences from other 
countries
— Revitalize and reinforce the functions of HBFC to 
housing finance as a demand side measure.
Implementing Tools
— Conduct study to explore new and innovative housing 
finance;
— Based on the recommendations from the study, 
mobilize all the available resources to provide financing 
for housing purposes.
— Consider preference rates for the eligible households on 
long-term bases.
— Provide soft loans for individual housing builders who 
want to have their own houses, but unable to do for 
scarcity of capital;
Implementing Agency: 
— RAJUK, Ministry of HPW, Ministry of Finance and 
Bangladesh Bank. 
--- PAGE 129 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 125
Policy-HN/1.4: Expedite and Ease 
Planning Permission to Increase the Rate 
of Housing Supply
Easy and smooth building plan approval process will 
increase the rate of housing construction resulting 
in increase in the supply of houses. 
Strategic Action: 
— Ease legal and procedural processes of building design 
approval.
Implementation Tools:
— Establishment of one Stop Service Center by RAJUK for 
prompt development permission.
— A transparent and accountable system should be 
developed to reduce suffering of the service seekers.
— It should also try for as much as possible automation of 
the approval process.
— City Corporation and Pourashavas may be involved 
in according development permission after sufficient 
institutional strengthening.
— Permit development of houses of certain level without 
formal approval, but following BC Rules and DAP 
Landuse. Enforcement of rules can be ensured through 
inspection. 
Implementing Agency: 
— PWD, LGED, RAJUK, City Corporations and 
Pourashavas.
Policy-HN/1.5:
Public Sector Housing Agencies should 
Play Greater Role as Housing Facilitator 
Instead of Housing Provider
Public sector housing production and supply process is 
lengthy and often mismanaged. Besides, public sector 
has so far failed to address the housing need of all income 
groups. As facilitator, public sector should promote 
infrastructure and services create a positive climate 
for investment in housing by the individual developers 
and commercial housing companies. It will expedite the 
housing supply. 
Strategic Action:
— Public and private sectors should emphasize less on 
direct housing and more on facilitating housing by the 
private sector. 
Implementation Tools:
— RAJUK and NHA should take up programmes and 
projects to develop infrastructure in potential city 
fringe areas and facilitate individual land owners and 
commercial developers to develop housing. 
Implementing Agency:
— RAJUK,NHA,LGED
Need of Standard for 
Block Based Housing Development 
Lately, some real estate companies 
are undertaking cluster type block 
based apartment development 
projects around Dhaka city, where 
a number of multistoried buildings 
are developed in a site. Some of 
these projects are in the very close 
to the city heart and others are in 
peripheral areas, for example, Japan 
Garden City in Mohammadpur, 
Rupayan City in the periphery 
of Narayanganj town, Lake City 
Concord in Khilkhet, Multiplan 
City in Mirpur-1, and Probani 
Ridgedale of Navana in Murpur-11 
etc. This kind of compact housing 
development is appreciable in a 
land scarce city like Dhaka. These 
projects are virtually creating 
high density clusters. But in most 
cases these are jumbles of concrete 
structures devoid of adequate 
community facilities including 
open space. Most of these projects 
are monotonous to look, they 
lack ventilation and deprive the 
dwellers of enough breathing space. 
Livability and healthy environment 
is mostly absent, as there is very 
little or no provision of space 
community and recreational.
Interestingly, current building 
construction rules do not contain 
any regulations for controlling 
this kind of developments. RAJUK 
should immediately embark on 
preparation of standards and 
rules for block based development 
ensuring community and open 
space facilities based on the number 
of people inhabiting in the area. 
BOX
6.1
--- PAGE 130 ---
PAGE 126 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
OBJECTIVE-HN 02:
TO ECONOMISE USE OF HOUSING LAND 
Bangladesh is the densely populated country in the world where land for housing is fast shrinking against rapidly 
growing population. Open land is fast shrinking in RAJUK area amid rapid urban growth. Land utilization should be 
economized so that land may be made available for other activities including infrastructure, open space and socio￾economic activities. 
Policy-HN/2.1:
Encourage Block Housing Concept 
This approach is direct intervention to meet housing need 
compared to plot allotment approach, where the land 
owner often keeps the land unutilized for long, sometimes 
with the motive to gain benefit through land speculation. 
Plot based development is sometimes inflexible, 
monotonous, and inefficient whether block development 
is mostly flexible, various and efficient in nature and 
maximizes use of land. 
Strategic Action: 
— Adoption of the block housing policy by both public and 
private sector housing agencies. 
— Integration of the concept in Private Residential Land 
Development Rules, 2004;
Implementation Tools:
— Develop standard in collaboration with RAJUK,NHA 
and professional groups and incorporate them in BC 
Rules through gazette notification;
— Real estate developers may be provided easy 
credit incentive for development of block housing 
development.
— RAJUK could take pilot project to implement block 
housing around MRT and BRT Stations;
— Special financial incentives for commercial real estate 
companies for block housing development. 
Implementing Agency: 
— RAJUK, NHA, PWD, and REHAB.
Policy-HN/2.2:
Discourage, Preferably cease Plot Based 
Housing Development Practice both, by 
Public and Private Sector Agencies
Amid severe scarcity of land, allotment of land for 
housing deprives many others from housing 
space. Instead, it is better to utilize lands for apartment 
development where many families can be accommodated.
Strategic Action: 
— Public and Private housing agencies should be refrained 
from taking up any more plot housing projects.
Implementation Tools:
— Discouragement to plot based housing should be 
incorporated in the national housing policy.
— To discourage housing companies dealing with plot 
based projects higher sales tax and VAT may be 
imposed.
Implementing Agency: 
— Ministry of Housing and Public Works, RAJUK, NHA, 
NBR.
PLOT DEVELOPMENT IN DHAKA
• Inflexible
• Monotonous
• Inefficient
Figure 6.3:
Concept Diagram of 
Block Housing Development 
(Plot and Block Development)
--- PAGE 131 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 127
OBJECTIVE-HN 03:
TO DEVELOP HOUSING WITH EASY ACCESS 
Intensification of residential development around high capacity rapid transit stations will ensure easy to high quality 
and fast public transport for people going to their work places. This kind of development is known as Transit Oriented 
Development (TOD) that features vibrant streetscapes, pedestrian-oriented built forms and land use characteristics 
that make it convenient and safe to walk, ride and use public transport. Bring compact, mixed-use development within 
walking distance of high capacity rapid transit. Frequent fast, and reliable high capacity rapid transit reduces dependence 
on personal motor vehicles and unofficial transports such as rickshaw.
Policy-HN/3.1: Encourage to Develop 
Housing Close to the Transit Stations 
Strategic Action:
— Develop infrastructure and services around transit 
points.
— Public sector housing agencies should take up housing 
projects close to transit points.
Implementation Tools:
— Identify the Mass Transit Stations for Transit Oriented 
Development that would be detailed out in the Detailed 
Area Plan(Sample diagram has been presented in 
Figure-6.4);
— RAJUK and NHA should develop their own apartment 
projects in these locations and encourage the private 
developers.
Implementing Agency: 
— RAJUK, NHA, Donors, NGOs, Employers, and REHAB.
Policy-HN/3.2 : Encourage Housing 
Development within the Designated Urban 
Centers 
To defuse housing development from core to the outer 
urban areas the regional and sub-regional urban centres 
should be enabled to have new housing development. 
Strategic Action:
— Develop more roads install water and gas supply 
networks and drainage system in regional and sub￾regional urban centres.
Implementation Tools:
— Develop more roads, install water supply network, gas 
supply network and drainage system in regional and 
sub-regional urban centres. 
— RAJUK should take up new secondary and primary road 
development projects.
— RAJUK and NHA can develop apartment projects and 
create a demonstration effect on the private developers. 
Implementing Agency: 
— RAJUK, NHA, LGED, DWASA, and REHAB.
Residential/ Employment
Transit Station
Core Commercial
Open Space
400-800 meters
(1/4 - 1/2 mile)
Figure 6.4: 
Concept Diagram 
of Transit Oriented Development 
(TOD)
--- PAGE 132 ---
PAGE 128 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
OBJECTIVE-HN 04: 
TO INCREASE LOW AND MIDDLE INCOME HOUSING SUPPLY
RAJUK and NHA are the paramount public sector housing development agencies in Dhaka city providing housing 
lands and apartments. However, mostly the upper and upper middle income groups are benefited from their housing 
projects. City’s low income groups receive a minimal share of their housing (see section 6.2.1). RAJUK in Purbachal 
project reserved only 4.3%(110.46 acres) for the low income groups, in Uttara 3rd Phase the share of the poor was only 
7.5% (40.51 acres) and in Jhilmeel Project the allocation was only 1.2%. Even the mechanism for allotment of land is not 
attainable by low and income classes. NHA had some success in providing low income housing, but its recent projects did 
not create any opportunity for the urban poor. This is creating social injustice. To address affectively the housing need of 
the urban poor government housing organizations should have more provision of housing for them with secure tenure. 
Policy-HN/4.1: Public Sector should 
Provide Affordable Housing to the Low 
and Middle Income Groups 
The poor and the middle income groups are not able 
to have housing from the market, as the real estate 
companies operate purely on profit basis. It is only 
government who can provide housing on terms and 
conditions affordable by these groups.
Strategic Action:
Evolve mechanism to deliver housing to the low and 
middle income groups at affordable rate. 
Implementation Tools: 
— Low rent high rise (10-12 storied) Public Housing 
projects for low income people near working place, 
CBD, and around TOD area;
— Land in the eastern periphery alongside the Hazrat 
Shahjalal (R :) International Airport could be used for 
low rise low income housing;
— Public rental housing projects for Government and 
Private employees;
— Provide housing credit to these groups at affordable rate 
of interest;
— Provide housing to these groups on long term hire 
purchase basis. 
— Provide funding for research on affordable housing for 
the poor.
— Provide housing credit to low paid Government 
employees.
— RAJUK should take up programme to implement low 
income housing projects in areas designated by 
DAP these type of housing. 
— NHA and RAJUK may take up low cost apartment 
projects near selected industrial sites like, Ashulia, 
Hemayetpur, Konabari, Gazipur.
— Appropriate mechanism has to be developed to ensure,
i. housing units going to the target group , and
ii. allottees are able to afford the housing units.
Implementing Agency: 
— M/O Land, RAJUK,NHA, Ministry of Finance, 
Bangladesh Bank
Policy-HN/4.2 :
Improve Conditions in Slums 
Improvement of slums will improve living condition of the 
urban poor. Contract may be reached with slum owners 
that rent will not be raised for a particular period of time. 
Exercising of the rent control provisions of the Rent 
Control Act may be applied to prevent house owners to 
indulge in exploitative measures against the tenants. 
Strategic Action:
— Policy decision taking up slum improvement project by 
RAJUK,NHA, City Corporations, Pourashavas.
— Work out together with the squatter and slum 
communities the ways to improve the living conditions 
on site or at more appropriate location elsewhere;
Implementing Tools: 
— RAJUK, City Corporations, Pourashavas can take 
up slum improvement projects in collaboration with 
private slum owners.
— Fund may be procured from the donor, GoB or agency’s 
own source.
— The slum owners must agree that they would not raise 
house rent for next five years.
— Exercise legal powers under House Rent Control Act 
1991 to control house rent in favor of tenants.
— Publicize important provisions of rent control for 
information of house owners and tenants. 
Implementing Agency: 
— RAJUK,NHA, Urban Local Governments. 
--- PAGE 133 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 129
OBJECTIVE-HN 05:
TO ENSURE DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTHY AND LIVABLE 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
For better, living there is need to enhance the livability in neighborhoods by upgrading the quality of development and 
improving the quality of the public realm. 
Policy-HN/5.1:
Create Planned and Environmentally 
Sound Housing Neighbourhood in the 
Potential Urban Areas
Neighbourhood is a kind mahallah having distinctive 
entity and where local level day to day services and 
facilities are available. Neighbourhoods can be developed 
through systematic planning. 
Strategic Action:
— Devise standard rules for healthy and livable 
neighbourhood.
— Public and private sector housing agencies should abide 
by the approved rules of designing healthy and livable 
neighbourhood. 
Implementation Tools:
— RAJUK and NHA, as public sector housing agencies 
should devise the conditions of healthy and livable 
neighbourhood and follow them while designing their 
own housing layouts. 
— Determine the appropriate urban design elements at 
the neighborhood level, such as sidewalk width and 
materials, street lights and trees, and other street 
furniture.
— Promote the undergrounding of utilities and service 
lines.
— Neighborhood traffic management strategies to prevent 
traffic from nearby developments and regional traffic 
growth from intruding upon residential areas.
— Create ‘the Community Neighborhood’ to connect with 
Housing, Schools, Community facilities, and Parks 
(Sample diagram has been presented in Figure-6.5).
— Neighborhood Development scheme can be used to 
revitalize existing town centers and neighborhoods or 
build new ones at transit nodes and in other locations. 
Future public transit stops are important places to 
consider during the Detailed Planning stages (DAP) to 
maximize access to alternatives forms of transport (See 
BOX-6.2);
— Introduction of Pedestrian Oriented Development 
(POD), in regional centers, sub-regional centers and 
community centers and rural areas (Sample diagram 
has been presented in Figure-6.6 and Box-6.3);
— Neighbourhood should include a dense network of 
walking and cycling routes results in short, varied and 
direct connection that improved access to schools, 
community, services and public transport.
— Hospitals would be provided with a green buffer zone to 
make healthy residential area;
— Sufficient greeneries and waterbodies should be there to 
enhance livability.
— There should be provision of mix of functions; 
community spaces formation through complex public 
facilities.
Implementing Agencies: 
— RAJUK, NHA, Bangladesh Land Developers Association 
(BLDA).
--- PAGE 134 ---
PAGE 130 | DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035
Neighborhood
Unit Area
Primary
School
Secondary
School
Community
Center Mosque Neighborhood Street Park
Road Axis
of
Central
Green
Network
Axis of Public Transportation
400m
Figure 6.5: Concept Diagram of Community Neighborhood
10 minutes City
400m
2km
POD Area
Neighborhood
Area
by Walking
BOD Area
Regional
Area
by Cycle
Community Center
Figure 6.6: Concept Diagram of Pedestrian Oriented Development (POD)
--- PAGE 135 ---
DHAKA STRUCTURE PLAN 2016—2035 | PAGE 131
Neighbourhood Development Concept (NDC) 
in Smart Shape
NDC, also known as new urbanism, 
neo-traditional, includes a variety 
of housing types, a mix of land 
uses, an active center, a walkable 
design, and often a transit option 
within a compact neighborhood 
scale area either as infill in an 
existing developed area or as 
a neighborhood scale project. 
Automobile dependence design 
practice results in the loss of 
community vitality and makes 
neighbourhoods unwelcoming to 
pedestrians and bicyclists. It also 
increases traffic on the street leading 
to congestion. However, zoning 
utilizing NDC concept mixes land 
uses in a compact area can achieve 
a high quality neighborhood. NDC 
can guide new development patterns 
that are civic-oriented, pedestrian￾friendly, economically vibrant, 
environmentally sustainable, diverse 
housing types, and evoke a unique 
sense of place.
NDC is based on the principle that 
neighbourhoods should be walkable, 
affordable, accessible, distinctive, 
and true to the significant historic 
context of each community. NDC 
must be distinguished from Transit 
Oriented Development (TOD), 
NDC need not focus as close on 
transportation areas and parking as 
components of urban design.
Development on Greenfield sites 
located in rural settlement areas can 
be guided by NDC principles in order 
to minimize environmental impacts 
associated with new development. 
A more appropriate use of NDC may 
be re-established or expand existing 
village centers or growth center of 
community life.
The NDC principles and objectives 
of particular importance are:
• Sustainability 
• Compact Development 
• Mix of Uses 
• Accessibility and Transportation 
• Cultural and Environmental 
Context 
Generally, NDC is neighborhood in 
scale, 10 to 15 acres in area based 
on the geometry of a 1/4–mile 
maximum walking distance. Open 
space is typically 10% to 20% of the 
area, and about 70%-80% of the 
area is devoted to residential blocks, 
with the remainder (approximately 
10%) as mixed use with a focus on 
viable commercial space and civic 
functions. NDC requires dense 
(e.g. quarter-acre and smaller lots) 
residential blocks in order to create 
an internally-oriented neighborhood 
with enough people to help support 
the commercial and civic functions. 
NDC neighborhoods are carefully 
designed to function in ways that 
provide a high quality of life.
Pedestrian Oriented Development 
(POD) 
Pedestrian Oriented Development 
(POD) is a pedestrian friendly 
policy providing clear, comfortable 
pedestrian access to commercial 
and residential areas and transit 
stops. POD is employed through 
a combination of land design 
practices, including compact 
development, mixed-use, traffic 
calming, pedestrian – and public 
transit-orientation, and a mix of 
housing types. POD method may 
work well in community centers 
and sub regional centers. It also can 
be applied successfully in rural and 
suburban areas.
New Housing and commercial 
developments should incorporate 
pedestrian circulation into site 
layouts by providing not only 
sidewalks and walkways, but also 
human-scale landscaping, lighting 
and other features that promote a 
sense of safety and encourage people 
to make use of pedestrian amenities.
POD design can help support 
a community’s economic, 
environmental, human, and social 
health goals, by promoting human￾scale development consistent with 
the community’s vision
BOX
6.3